Avalore Combat Mechanics: Feats, Weapons, and Armor Integration
Combat Feats
Avalore’s combat feats grant special abilities that modify combat actions or provide new options. Below is a comprehensive list of Combat feats from the Avalore rules, including each feat’s mechanical Effect and Prerequisites, followed by guidance on integrating that feat into a Python-based turn-based combat simulator. (Feats marked Limited indicate abilities that can only be used once per turn, and only one such limited ability may be used in a turn[1].)
Aberration Slayer (Requires HAR 0) – Effect: “A long history with slaying aberrations leaves them trembling in your wake... Choose one of the following: Fae, Beast, or Undead. Whichever the holder chooses will generally avoid you unless they have a superior force, and when fighting them, do +1 extra damage on a successful hit.”[2] Integration: This feat can be modeled by adding an attribute to the character for a chosen creature type. In the simulator, whenever the character attacks a creature of that type, increase the damage by +1. This could be implemented by checking the target’s type during damage calculation and applying the bonus if it matches the feat’s selection.
Backline Flanker (Requires DEX: Stealth +2) – Effect: “While Hidden, whenever you make a Skirmishing or Melee weapon attack against a target in melee distance of one or more of your allies you do so with deadly efficiency. If your attack lands, it deals +1 damage to that target; if it misses, you make your next conceal action without the -3 penalty.”[3] Integration: In code, when a character with this feat is in a Hidden state and attacks an enemy adjacent to an ally, add +1 to the damage of a successful hit. If the attack roll indicates a miss, flag the character’s next Conceal action to ignore the normal -3 penalty. This could involve a boolean flag like ignore_conceal_penalty=True that is checked on the next conceal roll, then reset.
Combat Acrobat (Requires DEX: Acrobatics +2) – Effect: “You can make a vault action, which acts as both a dash and an evade.”[4] Integration: Implement a special Vault action that consumes one action and grants both the movement of a Dash and the defensive benefit of an Evade in the same turn. In the simulator, this could set both a movement flag (allowing extra movement) and an evasion state for that turn. Ensure that using Vault counts as an Evade for mechanics like attack roll penalties or feat triggers that care about evading.
Control (Requires STR: Athletics +3) – Effect: “Once per turn after landing an attack with a polearm, greatsword, or large shield, you may take 4m (blocks) of free movement and leverage your weapon to push the target wherever you move... If the target ends up adjacent to a wall... any subsequent attack in the same turn will deal +1 damage. This movement does not trigger Steadfast Defender... nor apply while in uneven terrain.”[5] Integration: After a successful hit with the specified weapon types, the simulator can allow a follow-up event: grant the attacker up to 4 blocks of free movement and move the target with them. If the movement places the target next to a wall, mark a state on that target (or on the attacker’s context) such that if the attacker makes another attack on them this turn, +1 damage is added. Be sure to check terrain and ignore triggering certain reaction feats (e.g., do not trigger Steadfast Defender reaction attacks during this forced movement).
Dual Striker (Limited; Requires DEX +1) – Effect: “With any combination of two: small blades, arming swords, finesse blades, meteor hammers, whips, maces, or fists (unarmed), you can dual attack as a single limited action. Each aim roll has a -1 penalty... For any mechanics or feats that this interacts with (e.g. Riposte or Death Saves), it counts as only one attack action. You can also draw, stow, or swap both Dual Striker weapons at the same time using your one weapon swap.”[6][7] Integration: Represent dual-wielding in the simulator by allowing a character with this feat to perform a Dual Attack action (costing one action). This action should internally execute two attack rolls (each with a -1 accuracy penalty applied in addition to weapon modifiers[8]), and resolve damage for each hit. However, for reaction triggers or any effect counting number of “attack actions,” treat the dual attack as one action. For implementation, you might have a composite action that loops twice over the attack routine but sets a flag so that if, for example, a Riposte feat checks “was attack action used?”, it only triggers once. Also, allow equipping or swapping two weapons at once (the inventory management logic can check for this feat and handle two-weapon sets as a single swap action).
Evasive Tactics (Requires DEX: Acrobatics +1) – Effect: “When critical (HP critical), the first grazing hit you take each round does not trigger a Death Save (including those that normally bypass grazing). Additionally, you may make Riposte Attacks or Parry without triggering a Death Save. Cannot be taken with Death's Dance or Second Wind.”[9] Integration: In the simulator, when a character’s HP is in a “critical” state (e.g., below 0 or a defined threshold causing death saves), modify the death save triggers: if this feat is present, keep a boolean for whether a grazing hit has occurred this round. The first time a grazing hit happens, suppress the normal death-save check. Also, if the character performs a Riposte or Parry reaction, ensure those actions do not call the death-save routine. Essentially, gate the death save function with conditions: if character.has_feat("Evasive Tactics") and (action in ["Riposte","Parry"] or (hit.is_graze and not used_graze_buffer)): skip death_save.
Feint (Limited; Requires DEX: Finesse +2) – Effect: “As a limited action you may make an unarmed attack or non-limited maneuver that ignores bonuses from Shieldmaster and Quickfooted.”[10] Integration: This feat introduces a special Feint action. Implement it as a limited action that performs either an unarmed strike or a maneuver, but when resolving this action, temporarily negate the target’s Shieldmaster feat bonus to block and Quickfooted feat bonus to evasion (these feats grant defensive bonuses, which are ignored for this attack[11]). In code, mark the attack context with flags indicating to ignore those specific modifiers when computing the outcome (e.g., setting target.shieldmaster_bonus=0 for that roll).
Forward Charge (Requires STR: Athletics +1) – Effect: “After landing an attack with a greatsword, polearm, or staff, your next Topple or Shove maneuver in the same turn cannot be evaded or blocked... If the maneuver is successful, you may immediately move forward 3 blocks... This effect bypasses immunity to pushing and being knocked prone. Alternatively, after successfully Blocking with a shield you may move forward 3 blocks before performing a shield bash if you are capable.”[12] Integration: In the simulator, if a character with this feat hits an enemy using one of the specified weapons, set a flag that their next Topple or Shove attempt this turn is unblockable and unavoidable (ignore any Block/Evade rolls from the target)[13]. If that maneuver succeeds, allow an immediate 3-block move for the attacker and apply knockback/prone even if the target normally has immunity (override those conditions in the code). Additionally, if the character Blocked an attack with a shield, allow a 3-block move and then a shield bash attack as part of the same reaction sequence. This could be coded by extending the block reaction handling: after a successful block, check feat and permit a position change and a bonus shield bash action.
Hamstring (Limited; Requires INT: Perception +2) – Effect: “You focus on a target with a whip, recurve, or crossbow – aiming not to kill, but to stall. This attack, made with a -1 to aim, cripples the target for one round, reducing all forms of movement by 2 blocks and applying a -2 penalty to Evasion.”[14] Integration: Implement a special Hamstring attack (limited action) available if using a whip, recurve bow, or crossbow. This attack roll carries an extra -1 aim penalty inherently[15]. If it hits, apply a status effect on the target for the next round: mark the target as Crippled, such that the movement calculation subtracts 2 from all movement allowances and any evasion roll made by that target gets an additional -2 penalty. In code, you might create a StatusEffect('crippled', duration=1, move_penalty=2, evade_penalty=2) and attach it to the target on hit.
Hilt Strike (Requires STR: Athletics +1 and DEX: Acrobatics +1) – Effect: “As an action before Lifting or after Striking with a two-handed melee weapon you can strike with the weapon's haft or hilt for half (non-AP) damage. Hilt Strikes do not trigger Quickfooted, and bypass Grazing.”[16] Integration: This feat allows an extra attack using the hilt of a two-handed weapon. In the simulator, if the character is about to perform a Lift (preparing a 2-action weapon attack) or just finished a Strike with a two-handed weapon, allow a bonus action (not costing an additional full action) to perform a Hilt Strike. That attack deals half the weapon’s normal damage (rounded appropriately) and is treated as non-AP (armor does mitigate it normally, even if the weapon usually pierces armor)[17]. Also, ensure that if the target has Quickfooted, it does not get the usual evasion bonus against this strike, and treat the hit as a full hit (no grazing mechanism – i.e., if the evasion roll would normally result in a graze, still count full damage)[18]. Coding this might involve a function hilt_strike(attacker, target) that calculates damage = weapon.damage/2 (rounded up or down per rules) and applies it normally, and handling evasion by ignoring any special graze outcomes or Quickfooted evasion bonuses.
Lineage Weapon (Requires STR: Forging +1 and HAR: Belief +1) – Effect: “Select one template weapon (excluding unarmed) to become your lineage weapon; it gains a permanent +1 aim modifier when used by you. The weapon may be visually remarkable...”[19] Integration: This feat should attach a unique identifier or tag to a specific weapon type for the character. In a character data schema, you might have char.lineage_weapon = "Longbow" (for example). When the character attacks with any weapon of that template, add +1 to the attack roll (aim)[19]. This can be implemented by checking, during attack resolution, if the weapon’s template name matches the character’s lineage weapon, then adding the aim bonus. The simulator might treat this as an inherent property of that weapon for that character. (No direct action required, it’s a passive bonus.)
LW: Elemental (Requires Lineage Weapon feat) – Effect: “Select one of the following elemental effects: fire, lightning, ice, acid, or force. Your lineage weapon can attack with this elemental effect... The effect of the element is at DM discretion.”[20] Integration: As a once-chosen augmentation, this allows adding an elemental damage type to the lineage weapon’s attacks. In the simulation, you can store char.lineage_element = "fire" (for example) when this feat is taken. During an attack with the lineage weapon, mark the damage type or apply additional effects according to element (e.g., maybe fire could ignite targets, ice could slow them, etc., which would be scenario-specific). The exact mechanical benefit isn’t specified beyond DM discretion, so the simulator could allow a hook for elemental interactions without a fixed rule. For example, one might implement a damage type system and let specific enemy resistances or vulnerabilities come into play.
LW: Flexible Design (Limited; Requires Lineage Weapon feat) – Effect: “Select an additional weapon template. Your Lineage Weapon can switch between the two templates freely on your turn.”[21] Integration: This feat effectively gives the lineage weapon two forms (e.g., can count as two different weapon classes). Model this by storing a second template for the lineage weapon (e.g., a lineage sword that can also take the form of a spear). In-game, allow the player to switch the weapon’s form as a free action or as part of an attack declaration. Implementation could involve an attribute like char.lineage_weapon_alternate = "Polearm" and logic that, when attacking or at turn start, the character can choose which form to use. The simulator should then use the corresponding stats (damage, range, action cost) of the chosen form for that turn’s attacks.
LW: Mastery Of The Elements (Requires LW: Elemental feat) – Effect: “Your lineage weapon can attack with any of the five elements... You must attune the weapon to a specific element when entering combat and it takes one action to switch it to a different element in combat. The effects of the element are at DM discretion but are greater than they would be normally.”[22] Integration: Building on LW: Elemental, this allows dynamic switching of the weapon’s element. Represent this by letting the player set char.active_element at the start of combat (no action cost) and change it by spending an action. The simulator can incorporate elemental effects with greater magnitude (perhaps if an element normally adds +1 damage or a minor status, a “Mastery” might increase that). The exact effects are narrative-driven, but the integration means providing a mechanism to change the elemental attribute of the weapon mid-fight using an action, and ensuring the effect is more potent than the base Elemental feat (which the DM might script separately).
LW: Lacuna (Requires Lineage Weapon feat) – Effect: “Once per scene for two actions, you can unleash the destructive power of your weapon. Pick a block within the range category of your weapon; all enemies within Melee distance of that block take damage equal to your number of Lineage Weapon feats. All enemies within Skirmishing distance of that block are knocked prone.”[23] Integration: Implement Lacuna as a special AOE attack available once per encounter (“scene”). In the simulator, track a per-encounter cooldown for this feat. When used (costing both actions of the turn), allow the player to specify a target location (within the weapon’s normal range). Calculate damage to all enemies in that area: each takes damage equal to the count of the character’s “Lineage Weapon” feats (e.g., if the character has 3 LW feats including Lacuna, deal 3 damage to each)[24]. Also, any enemy within skirmishing distance (2–8 blocks) of that point is set to a Prone state. The integration requires iterating over targets in area and applying damage and status. After use, mark the feat as expended for the scene (could use a boolean or a cooldown counter).
LW: Questing Bane (Requires Lineage Weapon feat) – Effect: “Lineage Weapon's bonus is upgraded to a +2 when facing a creature that belongs to a distinct species that it has assisted in slaying in a previous scene/event. Note down each unique species your Lineage Weapon has defeated.”[25] Integration: This requires the system to remember which species the lineage weapon has “claimed.” You can maintain a set of species on the character or weapon (e.g., weapon.slain_species = {"Orc", "Dragon"} etc.). During combat, if the target’s species is in that set, apply +2 aim bonus instead of +1 when using the lineage weapon[26]. This means the aim modifier for lineage weapon becomes context-dependent. When a combat ends (or at appropriate story triggers), if the character killed a new species, add it to the set. The simulator can handle this by checking enemy type on attack and adjusting aim.
Mighty Strike (Requires STR: Athletics +2) – Effect: “Your attack actions (not reactive attacks) using a Sling, Staff, Crossbow, Mace, Large Shield, Unarmed, or Hilt Strikes may now knock the affected targets back 3 blocks.”[27] Integration: For the specified attack types, incorporate a knockback effect on hit. In the combat simulator, whenever the character hits with one of those weapons or attack forms, move the target 3 blocks away from the attacker’s position (if terrain and positioning allow). Represent this by adjusting the target’s coordinates or grid position. Ensure this only applies on the character’s turn (not on reaction attacks like Riposte or Shield Bash)[27]. In code, after dealing damage for those weapon hits, call a function to handle knockback movement.
Patient Flow (Limited; Requires DEX +2) – Effect: “As a limited action with at least one hand free, you Evade and enter a Flowing Stance. While in this stance, if you Evade an attack made from a Melee or Skirmishing weapon and there is another target (besides your attacker) within Melee range, make a Riposte or Unarmed attack roll against them with a -2 modifier. On a success, the incoming attack and its effects are redirected to that alternate target... The new target may still Evade or Block the redirected attack, but cannot make a Riposte or Shield Bash from it.”[28][29] Integration: This complex feat can be broken down in simulation as follows: If the character declares Patient Flow as a limited action, mark the character as being in “Flowing Stance” until the start of their next turn. If, during this stance, the character Evades an incoming melee/skirmish attack and an alternate enemy is adjacent to the character, the simulator should automatically prompt a counter-attack roll (either using the Riposte rules or a basic unarmed attack) against that alternate enemy with a -2 penalty[30]. If that roll succeeds (hits), then redirect the original attack’s effects onto the new target – meaning in the simulation, apply the original attack’s damage and any on-hit effects to the alternate target instead of the original character. The new target is allowed to attempt their own Evade or Block against this redirected strike (so the simulator should process that defense), but if it hits them they cannot retaliate with feats like Riposte or Shield Bash since it’s considered already a reaction[31]. Implementation involves hooking into the evasion success event: when the character evades, check stance and nearby enemies, perform the contest roll for redirection, and transfer damage if appropriate.
Quickdraw (Limited; Requires DEX +1) – Effect: “While wielding a longbow, crossbow, or sling, you may take a Quickdraw action. This can act as either a Dash and Loose or Evade and Loose and must be declared. Quickdraw attacks are made with a -2 penalty and do 1 less damage than normal (4 AP for crossbow, 5 damage for longbow & sling).”[32] Integration: Create a Quickdraw action that is only available if the character’s equipped weapon is a longbow, crossbow, or sling. This action uses both of the character’s two actions (since it combines movement or evasion with an attack). The player must declare if it’s Dash+Loose (move and shoot) or Evade+Loose (dodge and shoot). In the simulator, implement it as a sequence in one turn: if Dash+Loose, allow up to normal Dash movement then one attack; if Evade+Loose, set the character’s state to evading (capped at usual +3 skill) then perform one attack. Apply a -2 aim penalty on the attack roll and reduce the damage by 1 from the weapon’s base[33] (for a crossbow that normally does 5 AP, do 4 AP; longbow/sling normally 6/6 does 5, etc.). Ensure this counts as a limited action (only once per turn). You might implement this as a specialized function that applies those modifications and handles both actions at once.
Rakish Combination (Requires DEX: Finesse +1 and STR: Athletics +1) – Effect: “After successfully landing an Unarmed attack, your next Unarmed attack action is either made with a +1 bonus to aim (does not stack) OR deals a full 4 damage, regardless of your STR: Athletics.”[34] Integration: In the simulator, when the character hits with an unarmed attack, set a flag (for one use) that their next unarmed attack has an enhanced effect. The player can choose which benefit to apply (aim bonus or fixed damage) – you may model this as the feat automatically giving the aim bonus by default, but if the character’s Strength is low (such that their normal unarmed damage <4), they might prefer the 4 damage option. To implement both options, you could allow the character/AI to decide or always give the optimal result. Mechanically: store something like char.next_unarmed_bonus = 'aim' or 'damage'. On the next unarmed attack roll, if 'aim', add +1 to hit roll[35]; if 'damage', override the damage calculation to a flat 4 (bypassing the usual STR scaling)[35]. After that attack, clear the flag or mark it used. Ensure that if multiple unarmed hits happen in one multi-attack action (like Dual Striker fists), only the first attack triggers this and the bonus applies to the next action, not within the same dual strike (per the wording, “next unarmed attack action”).
Reactive Stance (Requires DEX: Finesse +2) – Effect: “While unarmed, if you successfully evade a hit you can take a free, immediate Maneuver action (including limited Maneuver actions) against the person that attacked you so long as they are within your range (cannot be used at the same time as Riposte).”[36] Integration: In code, if the character is unarmed and performs a successful Evade (completely avoiding an attack) against an adjacent attacker, allow a free Maneuver in response. Maneuvers include things like Grapple, Shove, etc., some of which might normally consume an action (even limited ones). This feat waives the action cost for one maneuver used immediately as a reaction. To implement, hook into the evasion resolution: if attacker_distance <= 1 (melee range) and the character is unarmed and not simultaneously using a Riposte (check they didn’t also have Riposte feat triggered), then present or automatically execute a maneuver action. You might create a function perform_reactive_maneuver(attacker) that handles this. For fairness, ensure only one of Riposte or this triggers – e.g., if the character has both feats, decide priority or have them choose (the feat text implies Riposte and this are mutually exclusive in timing).
Rousing Inspiration (Limited; Requires HAR +1) – Effect: “As a single limited action using your voice, playing an instrument, or a motivational command, you can bolster all allies within skirmishing range. They gain temporary HP equal to your HAR + 2, but may only be bolstered this way from any source once per scene.”[37] Integration: Implement a Rousing Inspiration ability as a limited support action. In simulation, when used, iterate over all allied characters within skirmish distance (2–8 blocks) of the user and grant each temporary HP = (user’s Harmony stat + 2)[38]. Temporary HP can be stored as a separate value that is depleted before regular HP. Make sure to mark each affected ally as “inspired” so they cannot receive this buff again in the same scene from any source (to enforce the once-per-scene stacking limit). This could be done with a flag on characters like char.temp_hp_source = "RousingInspiration" and a timestamp/scene ID to prevent reapplication. After applying, deduct one of the user’s limited actions for that turn.
Sentinel (Requires STR +1 and Shield Bash feat) – Effect: “You can now wield a polearm with a shield. Once per round after you have taken the lift action on your turn, and after you successfully block an attack with your shield, you can strike in retaliation using your polearm or javelin in place of a regular shield bash... You are able to make regular shield bash attacks for the remaining time until your next turn. This attack can be blocked or evaded, but does not trigger other reactions.”[39] Integration: This feat primarily expands what the character can equip and do when blocking. First, allow the equipment system to accept a polearm in one hand and a shield in the other (normally not allowed) – so in the character’s equipment slots, do not treat polearms as strictly two-handed if this feat is present. Second, after a successful shield Block, the simulator should offer a bonus reaction: a Polearm/Javelin counter-attack instead of a standard shield bash[40]. Implement this by detecting a successful block event: if the character has Sentinel and has a polearm or javelin ready, perform an attack roll with that weapon against the attacker (this uses up the once-per-round retaliation). This special attack follows normal hit rules (the foe can block or evade it) but should not trigger further reactions like Riposte from the enemy[41]. The phrase “you must lift again to attack on your following turn” indicates that using the polearm this way might consume its “lift” (preparation) – in simulation, you might enforce that if the character used their polearm to counter, on their next turn they need to spend an action to Lift the polearm again before striking normally. Ensure that even after using this retaliation, the character can still perform normal shield bash reactions for other blocks until turn’s end (Sentinel doesn’t remove that)[41].
Shield Wall (Requires STR: Athletics +3 and STR: Fortitude +2) – Effect: “Form a line with another large shield user directly adjacent to your left, right, or both. While positioned this way, each of you add +1 to your Sentinel or Shield Bash attack aim and to block rolls made against ranged attacks. If your line holds its position this effect extends to Steadfast Defender attacks as well... The shield wall can be extended by others with this feat, however its effects do not stack.”[42] Integration: This feat provides a formation bonus. In the simulator, detect when two or more characters with large shields and this feat are adjacent in a horizontal line. If so, mark them as in a Shield Wall formation. While in this formation, apply a +1 bonus to their attack rolls when using Sentinel’s polearm retaliation or Shield Bash actions[43], and also a +1 bonus to any blocking rolls against ranged attacks (e.g., if an arrow comes at them, effectively increase their block success chance or shield’s effect by +1)[44]. If the formation remains unbroken (they stay adjacent) through the round, also grant +1 aim to any Steadfast Defender opportunity attacks they make[43]. To implement, you might update characters’ state each turn or movement: if position[i] and position[i+1] both have shield wall, flag both as wall_active. Then when calculating their attack or block mods, if wall_active and the attack type matches, add +1. Ensure that adding more people in line doesn’t stack beyond +1 (the code should not double-count even if 3 people line up).
Skirmishing Party (Requires DEX: Stealth +1) – Effect: “When in a group, all allies within Skirmishing distance of you make DEX: Stealth checks with a +1 modifier until your party is discovered. If your party attacks first, each member adds a +2 bonus to their initiative.”[45] Integration: This feat confers passive group benefits for ambushes. In simulation, if a character with this feat is present and the party is sneaking (i.e., making group stealth checks), add +1 to the stealth skill roll for all allies within 8 blocks (skirmish range)[46]. If combat then begins with the party initiating (they weren’t detected and choose to attack), give all allies in range +2 to their initiative rolls for the first round[46]. Implementation could involve checking, when calculating initiative at combat start, whether an ally with this feat was nearby and undetected; if so, modify those allies’ initiative values accordingly. This likely requires the simulator to understand a “stealth phase” before combat.
Strategic Archer (No requirement) – Effect: “If higher than 3m (3 blocks) above your target, any hits with a ranged weapon do an extra +1 damage on a successful hit.”[47] Integration: Simply put, if the character’s vertical position (or elevation in whatever coordinate system) is at least 3 blocks higher than the target’s position, then for any ranged attack that hits, increase the damage by +1[47]. In the simulator, you should include height as part of a target query. When resolving damage for ranged weapons (bows, crossbows, throwing weapons, etc.), check if attacker.z - target.z >= 3: damage += 1. This encourages taking high ground.
Two Birds One Stone (Limited; Requires INT: Perception 0) – Effect: “As a limited action, whenever you fire a Crossbow or use a Spellbook you can choose to have your bolt pierce one enemy and hit another behind them as long as they are in-line with you. Both targets must be within 5m (5 blocks) of each other and the second target does not take AP damage.”[48] Integration: Implement a special attack option for crossbows and spellbooks: Piercing Shot. When the character uses a crossbow attack (or a spellbook cast that is analogous to a bolt), allow them to target a second enemy in a straight line directly behind the first target (relative to the shooter). The second target must be within 5 blocks of the first along that line[49]. In the simulator, you would perform one attack roll; if it hits the first target, apply damage normally to that target. Then also apply damage to the second target (maybe automatically hit since it’s a straight line shot through?) – however, likely you should roll separately to hit the second target or just assume the same roll applies. The second target’s damage should be non-AP, meaning armor will fully apply (even if the weapon normally pierces armor)[50]. So when calculating damage for target2, do not ignore their armor’s damage reduction. Code-wise, after a hit on target1, find target2 (if any) at line and distance <=5. If found, resolve a hit on them (possibly with the same attack roll minus an accuracy penalty if GM wants, but rules don’t mention a penalty, just that it hits if lined up). Then subtract armor soak normally regardless of weapon’s usual AP property.
Volley (Limited; Requires DEX +1) – Effect: “With a recurve bow or longbow, you can take two rapid shots in quick succession in the same time as a normal attack (1 action for recurve, 2 actions for longbow). Each aim roll has a -1 penalty added to the weapon's normal aim roll. Can only be used once per turn.”[51] Integration: This feat allows extra shots with bows. In the simulator, if the character is using a Recurve Bow (which normally costs 1 action to shoot) or a Longbow (2 actions to shoot), they can choose to fire two arrows as one action sequence. For a recurve bow, it still costs 1 action to do two shots; for a longbow, it costs 2 actions (the normal full attack) but yields two arrows instead of one[52]. Each shot is a separate attack roll with a -1 accuracy penalty in addition to the weapon’s own modifiers[53]. Implement this by creating a Volley Attack action that, when executed, performs two attack roll resolutions. Ensure it’s limited to once per turn (if somehow the character had extra actions, they can’t do Volley twice in a single round). This could be as simple as a flag checked in the turn loop or marking the character as having used their limited action.
Always Ready (Requires DEX 0) – Effect: “You get a +3 to your initiative. When surprised or ambushed, you lose this bonus but may instead negate any additional received penalties (lost actions, attack penalties, etc.).”[54] Integration: In the initiative calculation of your simulator, add +3 to the roll or initiative score for characters with this feat[55]. Store this as a base initiative bonus on the character. If the encounter has a surprise round (the character is caught off-guard), do not apply the +3 bonus for that fight, but instead, when processing the surprise, cancel out any extra drawbacks the system would apply to the surprised character. For example, if normally an ambushed character might lose an action on their first turn or suffer a to-hit penalty, ignore those penalties for this character[56]. This can be implemented by checking scenario flags: if combat.surprise and char.has_feat("Always Ready"), then char.initiative_bonus = 0 and char.ignore_surprise_penalties = True. Otherwise, initiative_bonus = 3.
Bastion Stance (Limited; Requires STR: Fortitude +3) – Effect: “As a limited action when you block you become immune to knockback, pulling, pushing, and prone until the start of your next turn. While in your Bastion Stance, shield bashes are made with a +1 bonus, and successful bashes knock the enemy Prone.”[57] Integration: This feat modifies the Block action. In the simulator, allow the character to declare Bastion Stance on their turn (costing one limited action) before or as part of using Block. Mark the character with a state (e.g., stance = "Bastion") until next turn. While in this state, if any effect would normally move the character (knock them back, pull them, push, or knock them prone), ignore those effects entirely[58]. Also, when the character makes shield bash attacks during this stance, add +1 to the attack roll, and if a bash hits, set the target’s status to Prone[59]. Implementation could involve modifying the block action: if char.has_feat("Bastion Stance") and char.declared_bastion: apply_immovable_flag(). And for shield bash resolution: if char.stance == "Bastion": aim += 1; if hit: target.prone = True.
Commanding Inspiration (Limited; Requires HAR: Belief +3) – Effect: “As a single limited action using your voice, playing an instrument, or a motivational command, your efforts grant allies a +1 to weapon aim rolls up to +2 when stacked with another until the start of your next turn.”[60] Integration: This is a temporary buffing action. In code, when used, iterate over all allied characters within some reasonable range (the feat doesn’t specify a range; assume those who can hear, maybe skirmish distance or same battlefield). Apply a +1 to all attack rolls (melee, ranged, spell attack rolls, etc.) for those allies until the start of the buffing character’s next turn[61]. The bonus can go up to +2 if another ally also uses a similar inspiration (i.e., if two different characters stack their inspirations, cap the benefit at +2)[61]. You could implement this by adding a status on allies like attack_bonus += 1 and tracking that it’s from inspiration. If an ally is already inspired once, a second instance would raise it to +2 but not beyond. After the next turn of the user, remove the bonus. Essentially, it’s a short-term global buff.
Death's Dance (Requires STR: Fortitude +1) – Effect: “While critical, once per turn, you can use any action (i.e. not only dash/evade) without triggering a Death Save. Cannot be taken with Evasive Tactics or Second Wind.”[62] Integration: In Avalore, when a character is Critical (0 HP but not dead, presumably) any strenuous action would normally force a death saving throw. With this feat, allow the simulator to skip the death save check for one action per turn. Implementation: if char.is_critical and char.has_feat("Death's Dance"), maintain a flag used_free_action=False each turn. When the character takes an action, if it’s the first non-evade/dash action that turn and used_free_action=False, set used_free_action=True and do not call the death save routine afterwards[63]. Subsequent actions in the same turn would still trigger death saves as usual. Ensure mutual exclusivity with Evasive Tactics/Second Wind feats by not allowing those to be chosen together in character creation (which might be outside simulator scope but noteworthy).
Dueling Stance (Requires DEX: Acrobatics +2) – Effect: “When wielding only a single small blade, finesse blade, or arming sword for your entire turn, you adopt a refined style. When evading, whenever you take a Grazing hit you can Parry with that weapon (mutually exclusive with Riposte). A parry can only be performed when your enemy is in your weapon's range. After a successful parry, your non-limited single-weapon attacks deal +1 damage on your next turn so long as you remain single-wielding… A Parry is a regular weapon roll made with a -1 modifier.”[64][65] Integration: This stance is active whenever the character has exactly one one-handed sword (small, finesse, or arming sword) equipped and uses no other weapon that turn. In simulation, enforce that if the character has any off-hand weapon or uses a two-handed attack or another weapon, the stance’s benefits don’t apply. While in this stance, modify the Evade mechanic: if an incoming attack is a graze (meaning the character’s Evade succeeded but not high enough to fully dodge, resulting in a partial hit), allow an immediate Parry attempt, provided the attacker is within the character’s melee range[66]. The Parry is treated like an attack roll with a -1 aim penalty[65]; if that attack roll succeeds (hits the attacker), you can consider the original attack deflected (the rules imply the grazing hit is effectively negated or turned aside by the parry). Implement this by hooking into the “grazing hit” resolution: if char.has_feat("Dueling Stance") and char.single_wielding and result == 'graze': allow Parry. On a successful parry, record a buff that on the character’s next turn, all their standard attacks (with that single weapon) do +1 damage[67]. This buff should be cleared after the next turn or if the character ceases to single-wield. Also, ensure if the character also has Riposte feat, they must choose either to Parry or Riposte on an evade – they cannot do both (the feat text says mutually exclusive with Riposte).
Fanning Blade (Limited; Requires DEX: Acrobatics +3) – Effect: “When wielding a throwing knife, meteor hammer, sling, or arcane wand, you spread your attack as a Limited Action: make one attack roll for every target in a 5x5 area in front of you, each with a flat -1 penalty. Any allies in this zone are also at risk of being hit and you must target everyone within the area.”[68] Integration: Implement a Fanning Blade attack mode. This is essentially a cone or area attack (5x5 blocks area immediately ahead of the character). In the simulator, when this action is invoked, gather all entities (enemies and allies) in that area. For each target, roll a separate attack using the character’s weapon (must be one of the listed weapons) with an additional -1 penalty on the aim[69]. Apply damage to each target hit. Because it’s indiscriminate, ensure the attack routine does not exclude allies – include them in potential targets if in area. This might be done by tagging the action as area-of-effect and iterating through coordinates. Mark that it’s a limited action (once per turn). Also note that although multiple rolls are made, it counts as one action being used.
First Strike (Requires DEX +1 and Always Ready feat) – Effect: “The bonus from Always Ready is increased to +5. During the first turn of combat, you act with three actions instead of two.”[70] Integration: This upgrades Always Ready. So if the character has this, set their initiative bonus to +5 instead of +3[71] (overriding the earlier feat). Additionally, in the simulator’s turn management, if it’s the first round of combat and this character is acting, grant them 3 actions for that turn instead of the normal 2[72]. Implement by adjusting the action counter at start of their turn: if turn == 1 and char.has_feat("First Strike"): char.actions_available = 3. In subsequent rounds, revert to normal amount (2). Make sure they still obey limited action rules (only one limited action even with an extra action to spend).
Galestorm Stance (Limited; Requires DEX: Acrobatics +3) – Effect: “After successfully evading one or more attacks while wielding a greatsword, polearm, or staff, you may make a Galestorm Strike as a limited action instead of a regular Strike on the following turn with that weapon. Galestorm adds an additional attack roll for each successful evasion on the prior turn in addition to your base strike. Each hit after the first on the same target has its damage halved, rounded up... Attacks against different targets do full damage. Additional hits from a Galestorm on the same target do not trigger additional reaction attacks.”[73] Integration: In the simulator, when a character with this feat Evades attacks, count how many attacks they fully evaded since their last turn. Suppose they evaded N attacks. Then on their next turn, if they perform an attack with a greatsword, polearm, or staff, allow them to declare a Galestorm Strike (costing a limited action). When executing Galestorm, roll to hit for the first attack as normal, then make an additional attack roll for each of the N evades from last turn[74]. These extra strikes can be against the same target or other targets within range (the player can choose distribution). If multiple strikes hit the same target, apply full damage for the first hit, then halve the damage for each subsequent hit on that target (rounding up each time)[75]. If strikes are directed to different targets, each target takes full weapon damage on hit[76]. Also, ensure that these extra hits do not themselves trigger things like enemy Ripostes or other reaction attacks (to avoid infinite loops)[77]. Implementation requires storing evades_count per character. On using Galestorm, loop for 1 + evades_count strikes, and handle damage as described. Reset the counter after using it (or at end of turn if not used).
Harmonized Arsenal (Requires DEX: Finesse +1) – Effect: “Bladed small weapons now double as throwing knives/hatchets. Throwing knife attacks made with these weapons receive +1 to their aim. Aim bonus does not stack with Lineage Weapon.”[78] Integration: This feat effectively turns any Small Blade the character wields into a dual-purpose weapon that can be used as a thrown weapon. In the simulator’s equipment or attack logic, if the character has a small blade and chooses to make a ranged attack with it, treat it as a throwing knife attack. This means use the throwing knife’s range (skirmish range) and damage stats. Also, apply a +1 bonus to the attack roll when throwing it[78]. Since the blade returns or the character has multiple (the feat doesn’t address retrieval, presumably they have a set), allow repeated use. Note that if the character also has Lineage Weapon on that blade, don’t double-stack aim bonuses – the max aim bonus stays +1 beyond normal (so either from this feat or lineage, not both)[79]. Code-wise, you could add an attribute on small weapons like can_throw=True for those with the feat and handle it in the attack selection menu. The aim bonus can be applied by checking: if attack_mode == 'throw' and weapon.type == 'small blade' and char.has_feat("Harmonized Arsenal"): aim_bonus += 1 (unless lineage already gave +1).
Momentum (Limited; Requires STR: Athletics +2 and DEX: Acrobatics +1) – Effect: “After taking a Dash action, on the same turn, you may make an unarmed attack with +2 damage as a limited action. You take 1 AP damage from the extreme force you exert.”[80] Integration: After a character uses Dash (the action to move extra distance) on their turn, this feat allows a follow-up Momentum Strike (unarmed attack) as a limited action in that same turn[81]. Implement by checking in the turn logic: if char.has_feat("Momentum") and they performed a Dash this turn, then they qualify to use the limited action for an unarmed attack. That unarmed attack, if executed, deals +2 bonus damage on hit (add 2 to the normal unarmed damage)[81]. Immediately upon performing it, also apply 1 point of armor-piercing damage to the attacker (self-damage ignoring armor) to represent strain[82]. Make sure to mark that as the one limited action for the turn. Code example: if action == 'dash': char.dashed = True; ... if char.dashed and not char.limited_used: allow 'momentum_strike' action.
Piercing Strike (Limited; Requires STR 0) – Effect: “When wielding an arming sword or small weapon, you can make an armour-piercing attack as a single limited action. If the target has AP immunity, the strike does +1 damage instead. After attempting a piercing strike, attacks made against you are made with a +1 modifier until the start of your next turn.”[83] Integration: This feat adds a special Piercing Strike action for one-handed swords or daggers. In simulation, as a limited action the character can declare a piercing strike with an eligible weapon. When resolving this attack, treat it as Armor-Piercing (AP) – meaning ignore the target’s armor soak entirely (the damage is not reduced by armor)[84]. However, if the target is normally immune to AP (some creatures or effects might negate AP attacks), then the attack doesn’t bypass armor but instead deals +1 damage as compensation[84]. After the action (regardless of hit or miss), apply a debuff to the attacker: until their next turn, any attack rolls against them get +1 to hit (they have compromised their defense by overextending)[85]. Implement this by adjusting the damage calculation for that attack and by setting a flag on the character like char.vulnerable = True that defenders check for an aim bonus. Clear the flag at start of the character’s next turn.
Quickfooted (Requires DEX: Acrobatics +2) – Effect: “When evading, add a +3 evasion bonus against attacks from unarmed, maces, greatswords, polearms, slings, javelins, and longbows. Does not take effect if you are holding a large shield or wearing heavy armour. Upon fully evading any attack, you may immediately take 2 blocks of free movement.”[86] Integration: This feat provides two benefits: (1) an evasion bonus vs certain weapon types, and (2) free movement after evading. In your combat engine, when a character with Quickfooted makes an evasion roll against an incoming attack, check the attacker’s weapon type; if it matches one of the listed categories[87], grant a +3 bonus to the evasion roll result (capped at whatever max, though normally evasion was capped at +3 by rules – this likely means if their Acrobatics is below +3, this feat ensures effectively +3 vs those attacks). Do not apply this if the character has a large shield equipped or heavy armor on – so if char.shield == large or char.armor_class == heavy then skip the bonus[88]. (This can be a conditional in the evasion calculation.) (2) If the character fully evades an attack (meaning the attack missed entirely, not even a graze), then after resolving that attack, give the character 2 meters/blocks of free movement immediately[89]. In code, you might call a function to move the character up to 2 tiles with no action cost, right in the enemy’s turn or right after the attack. This could be implemented by adjusting the character’s position or adding a “bonus move” state that is executed outside normal turn order.
Ranger's Gambit (Limited; Requires DEX: Finesse +1 and STR: Athletics 0) – Effect: “As a single limited action while wielding a recurve bow or longbow, you can make a point-blank shot at a target in melee distance with -2 to the aim roll. This shot is AP, bypasses grazing hits, and can push the target back 3 blocks... Whether you hit or miss, all attacks made against you with a melee weapon have +1 to their aim roll until the start of your next turn.”[90] Integration: This feat adds a risky close-range shot option. In simulation, if the archer is adjacent to an enemy (melee range), they can use Ranger’s Gambit: it’s a limited action to fire their bow at point-blank range. Apply a -2 penalty on the attack roll (because shooting an adjacent target is harder)[91]. If the shot hits, treat it as Armor-Piercing (ignore armor soak) and also as a guaranteed solid hit (no grazing – meaning even if the hit roll was only a marginal success, deal full damage)[92]. Additionally, upon hit, knock the target back 3 blocks away from the archer[93]. If the shot misses, the knockback likely doesn’t occur. In either case (hit or miss), because the archer exposed themselves, impose a penalty on the archer: until their next turn, any melee attacks against them get +1 to hit (similar to Piercing Strike’s drawback)[94]. Implement the hit effects and apply a vulnerability flag on the archer (like melee_vulnerable=True) which gives melee attackers +1 to aim until next turn. Ensure to only allow this action if a proper bow is equipped and target is adjacent.
Riposte (Requires DEX: Acrobatics +1) – Effect: “While holding a small weapon, finesse blade, or arming sword, if you successfully evade a hit you can make a free, immediate Riposte Attack with that weapon against the person that attacked you so long as they are within your range. A Riposte Attack is a regular weapon roll made with a -1 modifier that cannot be evaded or blocked.”[95] Integration: This is a classic reaction: in the simulator, if this character Evades an incoming attack (completely avoids it) and the attacker is within melee range, then automatically (or by prompt) perform a Riposte with the weapon in hand[96]. Check that the weapon is one of the allowed types (small/finesse/arming sword) and that the character hasn’t already used another exclusive reaction like Parry from Dueling Stance. The Riposte is an immediate attack roll with a -1 accuracy penalty[97]. If it hits, apply damage normally. The special part: the target cannot Evade or Block this counterattack[98] – so in the simulation, skip any evasion or block routine of the defender for this attack (they automatically take it if the hit roll succeeds). It counts as a free attack (not costing the character’s actions), but likely should still obey that only one riposte can be done per evasion trigger. Implement by adding an event listener on successful evasion that checks for this feat and then carries out the attack sequence. Ensure not to chain with Sentinel’s shield or other reactions – typically one reaction per trigger.
Second Wind (Requires STR: Fortitude +1) – Effect: “Once per fight, during your turn, you can use an action to give yourself temporary HP equal to your STR: Fortitude + 2. Cannot be taken with Death's Dance or Evasive Tactics.”[99] Integration: Implement a Second Wind ability that can be used once per combat encounter. In the simulator, if the character chooses to use Second Wind (costing one action), calculate an amount of temporary HP = (their Strength Fortitude skill + 2)[100]. Add this temp HP to the character (similar to how Rousing Inspiration gave temp HP, but self-only). Mark that Second Wind was used so it cannot be used again this fight (a boolean that resets after combat). This does not remove the character from critical or anything, just gives them a buffer of HP that can absorb damage. As noted, ensure the character cannot have this feat simultaneously with Death’s Dance or Evasive Tactics (so presumably handle that in character creation logic).
Shield Bash (Requires STR: Athletics +1) – Effect: “While holding a small or large shield, every successful block allows you to make an immediate, free Shield Bash attack against your attacker with that shield. A Shield Bash is a regular small/large shield attack roll (/roll smallshield or /roll largeshield) that cannot be evaded or blocked.”[101] Integration: This feat turns blocks into offensive opportunities. In simulation, if the character blocks an incoming attack (i.e., the attack was completely negated by their shield), then immediately perform a Shield Bash against that same attacker[102]. Use the shield’s attack stats (small or large shield as appropriate) for the roll. The attack cannot be evaded or blocked by the enemy[103], so treat it similarly to Riposte – if the bash hits, the enemy must take the hit (no defense roll). This is a free reaction (no action cost). This pairs with other feats like Sentinel (which modifies what a bash can do). Implementation: attach a handler on a successful block event – if char.has_feat("Shield Bash") then make attack(attacker, weapon=shield, aim_mod=0, ignore_defense=True).
Shieldmaster (Requires STR: Fortitude +1) – Effect: “You are adept with a shield. Blocking against unarmed, arming sword, small weapon, finesse weapon, meteor hammer, whip, throwing knife, staff, or recurve bows all get an extra +3 to your block roll. Ranged attacks are blocked with an additional +1 modifier.”[104] Integration: This feat enhances shield block effectiveness. In the simulator’s block resolution logic, if the character is using a shield to block and the incoming attack is from one of the listed weapon categories, add +3 to the shield’s block success roll[105]. If the attack is any ranged attack (e.g., bow, crossbow, thrown, etc.), add +1 to the block roll[106]. These modifiers likely stack with any base stat or skill used for blocking. To implement, determine the attack’s class and apply the appropriate bonus before determining block success. For example: if attacker.weapon.type in {unarmed, arming, small, finesse, meteor, whip, throw, staff, recurve}: block_roll += 3; elif attacker.weapon.range == 'Ranged': block_roll += 1. Note this works in conjunction with the normal blocking mechanics (which are typically a skill roll or contested roll).
Steadfast Defender (Requires STR: Athletics +2 and DEX: Acrobatics 0) – Effect: “When ending your turn without having moved and with a polearm, greatsword, or meteor hammer in hand, you brace and prepare. While in this state you are immune to knockback, pulling, or pushing. If any foe enters or exits your attack range before the start of your next turn, you get an immediate free attack against them with a -2 aim penalty. In the case of a meteor hammer you can make a second attack as they enter melee range from skirmishing. This free attack can be blocked or evaded, but does not trigger Riposte Attacks.”[107] Integration: In the simulator, implement a brace state that triggers automatically if the character didn’t move on their turn and is wielding one of the specified weapons[108]. Essentially, at end of character’s turn, if moved_distance == 0 and weapon in {polearm, greatsword, meteor_hammer}, mark them as Steadfast until next turn. While braced, set flags to prevent forced movement: ignore any attempt to move the character via knockback/pull/push (they stay put)[109]. Also, set up an opportunity attack trigger: if an enemy moves into the character’s reach or out of it, instantly perform an attack on that enemy[110]. The attack roll has a -2 penalty to aim[111]. If the character’s weapon is a meteor hammer, they actually get to make two attacks: one as the foe enters skirmish range (8 blocks) and another as they come into melee (adjacent)[112]. (This implies a meteor hammer has reach such that skirmish range is a threat range for it.) Implement by monitoring enemy movement: for each enemy movement, if enemy enters range or enemy exits range and char.steadfast_active, schedule a free attack. For meteor hammer, possibly treat the weapon as having two incremental ranges. The free attacks can be defended normally by the moving enemy (they can block or evade)[112], but importantly, if hit, the enemy cannot Riposte (since it’s their movement, not their action, and the feat specifies no Riposte)[113]. Code-wise, ensure the reaction doesn’t trigger other reactions: you might explicitly set a flag on these attacks is_reactive=True and check in Riposte logic not to trigger on those.
Trick Shot (Requires INT: Research +1) – Effect: “Three times per scene, a ranged attack may use both actions to add one of the following effects: Bodkin (armour piercing); Whistling (bypasses grazing hits); Dazzling (-3 to spellcasts for one round); or Incendiary (target + those in Melee range take 3 damage from an explosive blast). The effect must be declared before the attack and is considered spent regardless of success.”[114] Integration: In the simulator, give the character a limited resource (3 uses per scene) for Trick Shots. When the character makes a ranged attack (presumably with a bow or crossbow or thrown weapon), they can choose to spend 2 actions (i.e., their whole turn attack) to imbue one of the listed special effects into the shot[115]. Implement a selection for Bodkin, Whistling, Dazzling, or Incendiary before the attack roll. Each effect has a distinct outcome:
Bodkin: Make the attack Armor-Piercing (ignore armor soak)[116].
Whistling: The attack, if it hits, cannot be reduced to a grazing hit – treat a would-be graze as a full hit (essentially, bypass the grazing damage reduction)[116].
Dazzling: If the attack hits, the target suffers -3 to any spellcasting rolls for one round[117].
Incendiary: If the attack hits, the target and all creatures in melee range of that target take an additional 3 damage from an explosive blast[117] (likely normal damage, can be considered fire). This is an area effect on hit.
Regardless of hit or miss, using the trick shot consumes one of the three uses[118]. Track the remaining uses in the character’s data (e.g., char.trick_shots_remaining). The simulator should ensure two actions are available (so this typically can’t be combined with other attacks in the same turn). The effects can be coded as modifications to damage or adding status effects if hit. For instance, for Bodkin: just set a flag that this attack ignores armor; for Whistling: set a flag that prevents the “graze” half-damage logic; for Dazzling: if hit, apply a status to target like spellcast_penalty_3 for next round; for Incendiary: if hit, apply 3 damage to all adjacent units. After the attack, decrement the counter. If trick_shots_remaining == 0, the action is no longer available.
Vicious Mockery (Requires HAR +1) – Effect: “As an action, you can direct a scathing song, sonnet, or quip at a target within Ranged distance. They receive a -1 penalty to their skill checks OR attack, block, evade, & spellcast rolls for one round. This effect stacks with others up to a maximum of a -3 penalty.”[119] Integration: This is effectively a debuff action (a taunt/insult). In the simulator, allow the character to target an enemy up to 30 blocks away (Ranged distance) and use one action to inflict Vicious Mockery. Decide whether it’s affecting skill checks or combat rolls (the wording implies it can impose the -1 either broadly to all skill checks, or to all combat actions – possibly the user can choose one or the other). You might interpret it as the target gets -1 on everything (attack, block, evade, spell) except maybe skill checks, but it says “or”, which is a bit unclear. Possibly it means either penalize their skill checks or their combat rolls. To implement, you could simplify by applying -1 to all rolls the target makes until end of their next turn[120]. If multiple people use similar effects, it can stack up to -3 max. Keep track of any existing penalties on the target (target could have multiple debuffs). For a given target, ensure total_penalty = min(-3, sum_of_all_mockery_and_other_penalties). Apply the penalty by subtracting 1 from relevant rolls (perhaps easier to apply to everything the target does, given the broad categories). Remove or reduce the penalty after one round passes. The simulator should queue the expiration of this effect on the target.
Whirling Devil (Limited; Requires Combat Acrobat feat) – Effect: “As a single limited action, you can strike at every enemy you pass with a melee weapon in hand. Roll to attack for each unique target you become adjacent to for the rest of the turn with a -1 modifier. Whirling Devil attacks can be blocked or evaded... and attacks made with a two-action weapon deal half damage, rounded up.”[121] Integration: This feat allows a spinning charge attack. In the simulator, if the character moves (after activating Whirling Devil as a limited action) they will attack every enemy they move next to. Implementation: mark the character as in Whirling Devil mode for the remainder of the turn after they activate it. As the movement system updates the character’s position, each time the character enters a square adjacent to an enemy that they have not already attacked this turn, trigger an attack roll on that enemy[122]. Each of those attack rolls takes a -1 penalty to aim[122]. The enemies can defend normally (can block or evade these attacks)[123]. If the weapon the character is using normally takes 2 actions to attack (like a greatsword/polearm), then for these Whirling Devil strikes, damage is halved (round up) for each hit[124]. Make sure each enemy is only attacked once even if the character circles back (the phrase “each unique target”[125] implies you don’t hit the same target twice in one whirl). Code-wise, you can maintain a set of attacked_entities during that turn to avoid duplicates. When the turn ends, clear Whirling Devil mode. This effectively consumes movement and an action together, so ensure the character still cannot exceed normal movement distance; the action is used to enable the effect.
Python Data Schema for Feats: To integrate these feats into a Python-based simulator, you can create a data structure (e.g., a dictionary or class per feat) capturing their rules, and then in your combat engine check those rules at appropriate times (attack resolution, defense resolution, turn start/end, etc.). For example, a simple schema using classes might be:
class Feat:     def __init__(self, name, prerequisites, limited=False):         self.name = name         self.prerequisites = prerequisites         self.limited = limited     def apply(self, character, context):         """Apply feat effect based on context (attack, defense, etc.)."""         # This would contain logic triggers for the feat.         pass  # Example: Define some feats with triggers feats = {     "Shield Bash": Feat("Shield Bash", {"STR:Athletics": 1}),     "Riposte": Feat("Riposte", {"DEX:Acrobatics": 1})     # ... and so on for each feat. }
You might implement the apply method or separate handler functions for each feat that are called in the simulator’s event loop. For instance, when an attack is evaded, call a function on_evade(character, attacker) that checks if "Riposte" in character.feats: ... to execute the riposte logic. A rule-based approach could also encode each feat's effect as data. For example:
feats["Shield Bash"].trigger = "on_block_success" feats["Shield Bash"].effect = lambda char, attacker: perform_attack(char, attacker, weapon=char.shield, ignore_defense=True)
In practice, a mix of event-driven logic and state flags will handle these feats. Key integration point: your simulator should have hooks for events like on_attack_hit, on_attack_miss, on_evade_success, on_block_success, on_turn_start, on_turn_end, etc. Each feat will utilize one of these hooks. For instance, Shieldmaster modifies on_block_attempt by adding bonuses to the block roll if conditions match[106], whereas Steadfast Defender uses on_turn_end (to check stance) and on_enemy_move events (to trigger opportunity attacks)[126]. Designing an event system or conditional checks within the combat loop for each feat ensures their effects are applied in the right situations.
Weapons
Avalore categorizes weapons by range: Melee weapons (reach ~2 blocks), Skirmishing weapons (2–8 blocks), and Ranged weapons (6–30 blocks)[127][128]. Each weapon class has specific stats: damage, handedness (one-handed or two-handed), action cost to attack, any inherent accuracy modifiers or special traits, and stat requirements to wield properly[129][130]. Below is a list of all weapon classes from the Weapons Index, with their relevant stats and traits as given in the rules:
Melee Weapons (Range ~2 blocks)[131]
Unarmed: Traits: +2 to hit (very accurate)[132]; damage scales with Strength (base 1, +1 damage if STR:Athletics ≥ +1, +2 damage if STR:Ath ≥ +3, +3 damage if STR:Ath ≥ +5)[133]. Stats: One-handed, base 1 damage, 1 action to attack (command /roll unarmed)[134]. Requirement: None (No stat requirement)[135]. (Unarmed attacks gain bonus damage as Strength increases, reflecting higher STR:Athletics skill)[133].
Arming Sword: Traits: +1 to hit (balanced weapon)[136]. Stats: One-handed, 4 damage, 1 action (slash or stab with a sword, /roll arming)[137]. Requirement: STR: Athletics 0 (user’s STR + Athletics must be ≥0)[138].
Polearm: Traits: +2 to hit (long reach improves accuracy)[139]; Pierces armour – damage ignores armor soak entirely[140]. Stats: Two-handed, 6 damage, requires 2 actions (one to Lift/ready the polearm, one to Strike)[141]. Requirement: STR: Athletics +2 and DEX: Acrobatics +2 (needs both strength and skill to handle)[142].
Mace: Traits: +1 to hit[143]; deals +2 damage vs Medium and Heavy armor (extra armor penetration against armored targets)[144]. Stats: One-handed, 3 damage, 1 action (bludgeoning attack, /roll mace)[145]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics -1 (even characters with slightly negative Dexterity can use it)[146].
Large Shield: Traits: Pierces armour (shield bash ignores armor soak)[147]. Stats: One-handed, 2 damage, 1 action to bash (command /roll largeshield)[148]. Requirement: STR: Athletics +2 and STR: Fortitude +2 (requires significant strength to use effectively)[149]. (Note: Shields as weapons do lower damage but have the armor-piercing property when used offensively. Defensively, shields are used for blocking as covered in the Armour section.)
Staff: Traits: +2 to hit (very accurate)[150]; Bypasses grazing hits – if you graze an enemy, you still deal full damage (no half-damage on a marginal hit)[151]. Stats: One-handed, 5 damage, 2 actions (must Lift and then Strike with the staff, similar to polearm)[152]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics +2 (requires dexterity to twirl/wield effectively)[153].
Small Weapon: (Daggers, short swords, etc.) Traits: +3 to hit (very easy to hit with)[154]; one extra small weapon can be carried “for free” (doesn’t count toward the two-weapon carry limit)[155]. Stats: One-handed, 3 damage, 1 action (/roll small)[156]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics -1 (virtually anyone can use a dagger)[157].
Greatsword: (Includes greataxes, etc.) Traits: +1 to hit[158]. Stats: Two-handed, 8 damage, 2 actions (Lift, then Strike, /roll great)[159]. Requirement: STR: Athletics +2 (need high strength for these heavy weapons)[160].
Finesse Blade: (Rapiers, scimitars) Traits: +3 to hit (highly accurate)[161]; +1 damage vs unarmored targets (extra damage if target wears no armor)[162]; Bypasses grazing (no half-damage on graze, similar to staff)[163]. Stats: One-handed, 3 damage, 1 action (/roll finesseblade)[164]. Requirement: DEX: Finesse +2 (requires refined dexterity skill to use)[165].
Small Shield: (Bucklers, etc.) Traits: +1 to hit (offensively)[166]; Pierces armour (shield bash ignores armor)[167]; Bypasses grazing (if you hit on a graze, do full damage)[167]. Stats: One-handed, 3 damage, 1 action (/roll smallshield)[168]. Requirement: STR: Athletics 0 and STR: Fortitude +1[169]. (Small shields are more offense-oriented than large shields, trading damage for accuracy and special hit properties.)
Spellblade: Traits: +1 to hit[170]; (Has a magical flair but no explicit extra damage trait except possibly slight armor penetration mention in fluff). Stats: One-handed, 4 damage, 1 action (/roll spellblade)[171]. Requirement: HAR: Arcana +2 and STR: Athletics 0 (wielder must have some magical aptitude)[172].
Skirmishing Weapons (2–8 block range)[173]
Javelin: Traits: +1 to hit[174]; Pierces armour (treats armor as no protection on hit)[175]; versatile use (can be thrown or used in melee). Stats: One-handed, 5 damage, 2 actions (must Lift and then Throw, /roll javelin)[176]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics +1 and STR: Athletics +1[177].
Sling: (Includes slings and hand crossbows) Traits: +1 to hit[178]. Stats: Two-handed, 6 damage, 2 actions (pull back sling or load crossbow bolt, then loose, /roll sling)[179]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics +1[180].
Throwing Knife: (Throwing stars, etc.) Traits: +1 to hit[181]; Does not reveal a Hidden thrower on miss (if you are hidden and miss, you stay hidden)[182]. Stats: One-handed, 4 damage, 1 action (quick throw, /roll throw)[183]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics 0[184]. (Often these are treated as a set of projectiles you don’t run out of in a scene.)
Meteor Hammer: (chain weapons, weighted rope) Traits: +2 to hit[185]; +1 damage vs Medium/Heavy armor (blunt force good against armor)[185]; can be dual-wielded or carried as a free extra weapon (like small weapons)[186]. Stats: One-handed, 3 damage, 1 action (/roll meteor)[187]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics +1[188].
Whip: Traits: +3 to hit[189]; +1 damage vs unarmored targets (extra cut on flesh)[190]; Bypasses grazing (grazing hits still deal full damage)[191]; Cannot penetrate heavy armour (does 0 damage vs heavy armor)[192]. Stats: One-handed, 3 damage, 1 action (/roll whip)[193]. Requirement: DEX: Finesse +1[194].
Arcane Wand: Traits: +2 to hit[195]; Pierces armour (magical bolt ignores armor soak)[196]. Stats: One-handed, 2 damage, 1 action (shoot a short-range arcane bolt, /roll wand)[197]. Requirement: HAR: Arcana +2 (only those with magical skill can use)[198].
Ranged Weapons (6–30 block range)[128]
Recurve Bow: Traits: +2 to hit[199]; +1 damage vs unarmored targets (better against light targets)[200]; Bypasses grazing (no half-damage on graze)[201]. Stats: Two-handed, 3 damage, 1 action to shoot (/roll recurve)[202]. Requirement: DEX: Finesse +1[203].
Crossbow: Traits: +3 to hit (very accurate)[204]; Penetrates armour (same as pierces armor – ignores soak)[205]. Stats: Two-handed, 5 damage, 2 actions (must load then fire, /roll crossbow)[206]. Requirement: STR: Athletics +1 (need strength to draw/load)[207].
Longbow: Traits: +3 to hit[208] (strong draw, but requires skill). Stats: Two-handed, 6 damage, 2 actions (nock arrow, then loose, /roll longbow)[209]. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics +1 and STR: Athletics +1 (decent strength and dex needed)[210].
Spellbook: (Arcane tome used as a ranged weapon) Traits: +3 to hit[211]; Pierces armour (spell attacks ignore armor soak)[212]. Stats: Two-handed, 4 damage, 2 actions (chant incantation then cast spell, /roll spellbook)[213]. Requirement: HAR: Arcana +2 (requires magical knowledge to use)[214].
Each weapon’s action cost (1 or 2) tells how many of a character’s two actions are consumed to make one attack. Notably, two-action weapons like polearms, greatswords, longbows, etc., often require a preparatory action (e.g. “Lift” or “Load”) and then an attack action[215][216]. The combat simulator should reflect that a character must spend one action to ready these weapons (which could be done in a prior turn or the same turn) and the second action to actually strike/fire[215]. For implementation, you can give such weapons a property like weapon.actions = 2 and manage a state where the character uses an action to set weapon.ready = True (lifted/loaded) and then uses the next action to attack, resetting ready to False.
Weapons also have requirements – if a character doesn’t meet the stat requirement, they can still use the weapon but may suffer penalties (the rules mention penalties for not meeting armour requirements, and likely for weapons it might just mean they cannot wield effectively). In a simulator, it’s reasonable to prevent equipping if requirements aren’t met or impose a penalty like disadvantage on attack rolls. For fidelity, Avalore defines the requirement as stat + skill sum needing to meet a number[130]. For example, “STR: Athletics +2” means (STR stat + Athletics skill) ≥ 2[217]. You should implement a check when equipping or attacking that if requirements aren’t met, perhaps give -2 to hit (this is a house decision; the rules explicitly mention movement penalty for armor, but not weapon penalties beyond not being able to carry more than 2 weapons at a time).
Python Data Schema for Weapons: You can create a structure where each weapon class is defined with its stats and traits. For example:
weapons = {     "Arming Sword": {         "damage": 4,         "hands": 1,         "actions": 1,         "range": "Melee",         "to_hit_mod": 1,         "traits": ["none"],  # or list traits like "accurate"         "requirements": {"STR:Athletics": 0}     },     "Polearm": {         "damage": 6,         "hands": 2,         "actions": 2,         "range": "Melee",         "to_hit_mod": 2,         "traits": ["piercing"],  # ignores armor         "requirements": {"STR:Athletics": 2, "DEX:Acrobatics": 2}     },     # ... etc for each weapon }
In this schema, to_hit_mod covers inherent accuracy bonus, traits could include things like "piercing" for armor-piercing, "grazing" if it bypasses grazing, or special flags like "hidden_on_miss" for throwing knives not revealing on miss. You might encode those as booleans as well (e.g., ignore_armor=True). The simulator’s attack function can look at these to adjust behavior. For instance:
def attack(attacker, defender, weapon):     # Calculate base hit chance...     hit_roll = roll_2d10() + attacker.get_skill("WeaponSkill")     hit_roll += weapons[weapon]["to_hit_mod"]     # Check if attack hits...     if "piercing" in weapons[weapon]["traits"]:         defender_armor = 0  # ignore armor soak     # if grazing rule needed:     if result == "graze" and "grazing" in weapons[weapon]["traits"]:         # treat as full hit         damage = weapons[weapon]["damage"]     # else if graze normally: damage = half...     # Apply damage adjustments per armor, etc.
The weapon data helps the simulator know damage, how many actions to deduct, and special rules to apply. Also, you might want to include an entry for each weapon class’s block command or average damage vs armor (for reference or UI), but for backend simulation, the above suffices.
Armor
Avalore’s armor is divided into categories by weight: Light Armor, Medium Armor, and Heavy Armor, plus Shields as a defensive tool. Armor does not make you harder to hit, but instead reduces damage when you are hit[218]. Each armor category has a random soak value that is rolled to subtract from incoming damage, and a stat requirement (usually Strength or Dexterity) to wear without penalties[219][220].
Light Armour: Includes padded cloth, leather, etc. It reduces damage taken by 1d2–1 (roll results 0 or 1 damage mitigated) on each hit[221]. Use the command /roll block light to roll the exact damage absorbed when you’re hit. Requirement: DEX: Acrobatics -1 (virtually no requirement; even a slight Dexterity penalty is okay)[222].
Medium Armour: Includes chain, scale, breastplates, etc. It reduces damage taken by 1d4–1 (roll results 0 to 3 damage mitigated) on each hit[223]. Use /roll block medium for absorption. Requirement: STR: Athletics +1 (requires moderate strength to wear effectively)[224].
Heavy Armour: Includes full plate, heavy mail, etc. It reduces damage taken by 1d4 (roll results 1 to 4 mitigated; heavy armor always blocks at least 1 damage) on each hit[223]. Use /roll block heavy for absorption. Requirement: STR: Athletics +3 (requires high strength to wear)[223][222].
The soak roll for armor is made whenever the character takes a hit (unless the attack is specifically Armor-Piercing). For example, if a character in medium armor is hit for 5 damage, they would roll 1d4–1 and reduce the incoming damage by that amount (potentially taking anywhere from 2 to 5 damage in this case). The simulator should implement this by generating a random value in the appropriate range and subtracting it from the raw damage. Armor soak cannot reduce damage below 0. If an attack is flagged as AP (armor-piercing), these soak rolls are skipped (the attack ignores this reduction)[84].
Penalties for not meeting requirements: If a character wears armor without having the required stat, the rules specify a -2 penalty to all movement and additionally you subtract 1 less point on your soak rolls (i.e., your armor blocks 1 less than normal)[220]. In game terms, the simulator should check if character.strength+athletics < required_value (or equivalent for Dex for light armor) and if true, apply a movement reduction (e.g., reduce their speed by 2 blocks, and dash distance by 2 as well) and when rolling soak, effectively roll one step worse (or subtract 1 from the result, with a minimum of 0 soak)[220]. These penalties ensure unskilled characters are sluggish in heavier armors. The system should also enforce that characters under 14 cannot wear more than light armor (if relevant)[225].
Shields (defense): Shields in Avalore act as a special defensive tool. When a character uses the Block action with a shield, “shields block all incoming damage if the user has used the Block action on their last turn. On a successful roll, all incoming damage is blocked. Blocking against ranged attacks is rolled with a +1. A critical attack cannot be blocked.”[224][226]. In practice, using a shield requires spending one of your actions to Block (raise the shield). Then, until your next turn, any time an attack would hit you, you get to make a shield roll to try to negate it. The rules don’t explicitly detail the shield roll’s mechanics, but given the context it’s likely a 2d10 roll plus some modifier (possibly Strength or a Shield skill) versus a difficulty (possibly the attack roll or a static DC 12 like other tests). For integration, you can simplify by treating shield blocking as an opposed roll: for example, roll 2d10 + (perhaps STR or Athletics) and if it meets or exceeds the attack roll, the hit is completely negated. Shields completely stop damage (unlike body armor which only reduces it)[226]. Remember: - If the attack is ranged, the blocker gets +1 on their block roll (shields are a bit more effective vs arrows)[226]. - If the attack is a critical hit (natural max roll), it cannot be blocked at all[226] (the simulator should skip the block attempt in that case). - You cannot Evade and Block at the same time (the character must choose one defensive stance; the rules said Block cannot be used with Evade)[227].
Shields come in two sizes (Small and Large) which we saw in weapons. Their differences in defense are not explicitly numeric in the text, but logically a large shield might cover allies behind you as described in the Block action[228]. Indeed, Avalore’s mechanics note: “Raise your shield to block incoming hits against yourself and any allies directly behind you (within 2 blocks) in line-of-sight with your attacker.”[228]. So a large shield user can protect others behind them in a cone. The simulator can incorporate this by checking if allies are behind the shield bearer relative to the attacker and if so, allow the shield’s block roll to apply to those allies as well. (Small shields likely have a smaller coverage – the text implies any shield can do this, but DMs might restrict small shields to personal defense. The rules didn't differentiate in text, but you could choose to allow both to protect allies.)
When a shield successfully blocks an attack, the attacker’s hit is nullified (damage 0). With the Shield Bash feat, that also triggers a counter-attack. Without the feat, a block is purely defensive.
To integrate armor and shields: - Include an Armor class in your character model, with fields like armor_type (Light/Medium/Heavy) and maybe an armor_value or function for soak (e.g., a function that rolls appropriate die). - Also include a shield field (None/Small/Large) and a boolean state is_blocking for whether the character used the Block action. - During damage calculation: - If attack.is_AP and target has armor, skip armor soak. Otherwise, roll soak die per armor type and subtract from damage. - If target has a shield and is in blocking stance and the attack is blockable, perform a shield block resolution. If block succeeds, set damage to 0 (and you might return an outcome “Blocked”). - Manage the movement penalty by reducing character speed if character.strength+athletics < armor.requirement (for heavy/medium) or dex+acrobatics < requirement (for light).
Python Data Schema for Armor: Armor can be represented similarly to weapons:
armor_types = {     "Light": {"soak_die": (1,2,-1), "required": {"DEX:Acrobatics": -1}},   # (die_type, sides, modifier) or a custom roller     "Medium": {"soak_die": (1,4,-1), "required": {"STR:Athletics": 1}},     "Heavy": {"soak_die": (1,4,0),  "required": {"STR:Athletics": 3}} }
This example indicates Light uses a 1d2-1, Medium 1d4-1, Heavy 1d4+0. The required dict shows the stat check. A function to roll soak could interpret (numDice, dieSize, modifier) to produce a random value. Alternatively, store a lambda: "roll": lambda: max(0, random.randint(1,dieSize)+modifier) with appropriate bounds. For shields, you might not need a similar structure unless differentiating small vs large in block mechanics. But you could:
shields = {     "Small Shield": {"block_bonus_vs_ranged": 0, "coverage": 1},  # maybe coverage = how many allies behind can protect (1 ally)     "Large Shield": {"block_bonus_vs_ranged": 0, "coverage": 2}   # coverage 2 allies }
(The rules actually say +1 vs ranged for any shield is a general rule[226], not shield-specific, so block_bonus_vs_ranged could be universally 1. Coverage concept is from the text of block action[228].)
In simulation, to handle a hit on a character:
def apply_damage(character, damage, attack):     # If character attempted block with shield     if character.shield and character.is_blocking and not attack.is_critical:         block_roll = roll_2d10() + character.get_block_modifier()         if attack.range == "Ranged":             block_roll += 1  # universal +1 vs ranged         if block_roll >= attack.roll:  # success criteria (assuming oppose vs attack roll)             damage = 0             # Optionally, trigger Shield Bash feat effect here     # If damage not fully blocked by shield:     if damage > 0:         if not attack.is_AP:             soak = character.roll_armor_soak()  # roll 0-? based on armor             damage = max(0, damage - soak)     character.hp -= damage
This pseudocode shows where armor soak and shield block integrate. The actual block success condition may differ; if not specified by rules, a simple approach is comparing to attack roll, or using a static difficulty (e.g., roll >= 12 as a “success” like other tests). You could refine that if more info is available. The key integration is that armor soak reduces damage after a hit, whereas shield blocking can prevent the hit entirely before damage is applied.
Finally, movement & stealth: Heavy armor likely makes you less stealthy by narrative, but no explicit disadvantage was stated except the graze evasion issue (Medium/Heavy armor wearers do not get the half-damage “grazing” benefit when evading – they take full damage on a success that isn’t high enough[229]). We should integrate that: in the evasion resolution code, if character.armor_type in {"Medium","Heavy"} and result == "mixed_success": treat it as failure (take full damage). Light armor allows the “grazing hit halves damage” effect[229]. So include armor type check in evasion logic.
With these systems in place, the Python simulator will handle feats granting extra actions or reactions, weapons affecting accuracy and damage, and armor providing dynamic damage reduction and other defensive effects. All data and mechanics were drawn strictly from avalore.net’s rules[127][64][95][220], ensuring fidelity to the source. Each feat, weapon, and armor trait can be verified via the cited Avalore mechanics, and the integration approach translates those mechanics into programmatic terms for a turn-based combat engine.
Sources: The above information and quotations were taken from the official Avalore RPG mechanics pages on avalore.net[127][64][95][220], which detail the combat feats, weapon statistics, and armor rules in full.

[1] Extended Mechanics • Avalore
https://avalore.net/extended-mechanics
[2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] [84] [85] [86] [87] [88] [89] [90] [91] [92] [93] [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] [99] [100] [101] [102] [103] [104] [105] [106] [107] [108] [109] [110] [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] [116] [117] [118] [119] [120] [121] [122] [123] [124] [125] [126] Feats • Avalore
https://avalore.net/feats/
[127] [128] [129] [130] [131] [132] [133] [134] [135] [136] [137] [138] [139] [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] [145] [146] [147] [148] [149] [150] [151] [152] [153] [154] [155] [156] [157] [158] [159] [160] [161] [162] [163] [164] [165] [166] [167] [168] [169] [170] [171] [172] [173] [174] [175] [176] [177] [178] [179] [180] [181] [182] [183] [184] [185] [186] [187] [188] [189] [190] [191] [192] [193] [194] [195] [196] [197] [198] [199] [200] [201] [202] [203] [204] [205] [206] [207] [208] [209] [210] [211] [212] [213] [214] [215] [216] [217] Weapons • Avalore
https://avalore.net/weapons/
[218] [219] [220] [225] [226] [227] [228] [229] Mechanics • Avalore
https://avalore.net/mechanics/
[221] [222] [223] [224] Armour - Avalore
https://avalore.net/armour/